"The Necklace" - Maupassant

The most beautiful and charming women in the world are often born into a family of clerks, as if due to a mistake of fate; this is exactly the case with the one we are going to talk about now. She had no dowry assets, no hope, and no way to make a man with both money and status know her, understand her, love her, and marry her; in the end, she ended up marrying a junior clerk in the Ministry of Education.



She cannot pay attention to decoration, she is simple, but unfortunately she is like a downgraded woman; because women have no class, no family distinction, their beauty, their charm and their allure are for them to use for their birth and family background. Their natural alertness, superior instincts, and suppleness of heart constitute their only rank, and can raise the women of the people as high as the highest ladies.



She felt that she was born for all beauty and all luxury, and she suffered constantly. She was very sad because of the poor condition of her house, the rough walls, the old furniture, and the vulgar fabrics of her clothes. All this, which perhaps would have gone unnoticed by another woman of her own level, made her sad and annoyed, and the sight of the little Breton maid who took care of her chores gave rise to all kinds of sad regrets and wild thoughts.



She dreamed of those quiet reception rooms, how they were covered with oriental curtains, how they were lit with tall bronze lamps, how they had two tall waiters in shorts waiting for orders, and the hot air heater made the two waiters doze on the large armchairs.



She dreamed of those large living rooms covered with ancient wall coverings, and those exquisite furniture with porcelain bottles that None valued; she dreamed of those exquisite and fragrant small living rooms, where she could chat with her kind boyfriends at five o'clock in the afternoon, and with those famous men who were envied by the women's world and longed for a visit.



However, in fact, every day when she had dinner, she sat down opposite her husband at the small round table. The white cloth covering the table had to be changed every three days. As soon as her husband opened the lid of the soup basin, he said with a happy look: "Ha! What a broth! There is nothing better than it in the world..." So she dreamed of those rich and exquisite banquets. She dreamed of the gleaming silverware, of the wall hangings embroidered with fairy gardens with their ancient ladies and strange birds; she dreamed of the delicacies served on expensive plates, of the love words that she listened to with a cheerful smile while eating a portion of pink seabass or a portion of grouse wings.



And she had no decent clothes, no jewelry, nothing. But she only liked this one thing and felt that she was born for this one thing. She had long expected to be able to please, to be admired, to be seductive and pursued. She has a rich girlfriend, a female classmate in a church girls' school, but now she no longer wants to see her because she will always feel pain when she comes back after seeing her. So she was sad, regretful, disappointed and worried. Unexpectedly, one evening, her husband came back with a proud air and a large envelope in his hand.



"Look," he said, "here is something just for you." She hurriedly opened the envelope and took out an invitation printed with this sentence: "Mrs. Jorge Lamboneau, Minister of Education, has the honor to invite Mr. and Mrs. Loisel to a party to be held on Monday, January 18, in the headquarters building."



Her husband hoped that she must be very happy, but she actually threw the invitation on the table with a sad and angry look, and said coldly: "What do you want me to do with this thing?"



"But, my dear, I thought you were probably satisfied. You never go out, and this is an opportunity, this thing, a good opportunity! It took me so much effort to get it. Everyone wants invitations, which are difficult to get, but not many copies are distributed to colleagues. In the future, you will see all the political figures at the party."



She looked at him with an angry look, and then she exclaimed impatiently: "What did you ask me to wear there?"



He had never thought of this before; he said hesitantly: "But you wore that dress to the theater. I think it is very good, I..."



Seeing his wife crying, he stopped talking, was surprised, and felt confused. Two big tears slowly flowed from the corners of her eyes to the corners of her mouth; he licked his lips and said, "How are you? How are you?"



But she suppressed her pain with a strong patience, wiped her moist face, and answered in a quiet voice: "Nothing. But I have no clothes, so I can't go to this party. If you have a colleague whose wife can dress up better than me, you can give this invitation to him."



He was worried, and then said: "Let's do this, Matildi. How much will it cost, a set of decent clothes that you can wear again when you have the opportunity in the future, something simpler?"



She thought for several seconds, confirming her calculation, and also considered that the amount must be enough for her to ask for, so as not to trigger a surprised cry and a flat refusal from Setup, the frugal clerk. Finally, she answered hesitantly: "I don't know the details, but I estimate that with four hundred gold francs, it can be done."



His face turned a little blue, because he was saving such an amount in his hand to buy a gun so that he and some hunting friends could go to the plains around Nandur to hunt birds on Sundays this summer.



However, he replied: "That's it. I'll give you four hundred gold francs. But you have to find a way to make a beautiful dress."



The date of the party was approaching, and Mrs. Loisel seemed worried, worried, and a little restless. However, her new dress was ready. Her husband asked her one evening: "How are you? Think about it, you have been very strange these past three days." Then she said: "There is not a piece of jewelry, not a single gem, inserted or worn, not at all. This thing really upsets me. It is so poor. Now I would rather not go to this party."



He went on: "You can put some flowers in the future. In the season now, they are very good. For ten gold francs, you can buy two or three beautiful roses." She didn't listen at all.



"No...the most embarrassing thing in the world is to look poor among many rich women."



But her husband shouted to Setup: "You are so confused! Go to your friend Mrs. Forrest and ask her to borrow some jewelry. You can open your friendship with her."



She burst out with a cry of joy: "It's true. I never thought about this at first."



The next day, she went to her friend's house and told her about her troubles. Madame Forestier walked over to her large mirrored wardrobe, took out a large box, brought it over, opened it and said to Madame Loisel: "Choose for yourself, my dear."



She saw first a number of bracelets, then a necklace of pearls, then a Venetian-style gold cross, set with precious stones, of exquisite workmanship. She tried on the jewelry in front of the mirror, hesitating, unwilling to throw away these things and return them. she kept asking. "Do you have anything else?"



"There are plenty, you can look for it yourself. I don't know which Resolution is what you want." Suddenly, she found a necklace made of diamonds in a small box made of black satin. That thing was really overwhelming; her heart gradually beat Setup because of a kind of extravagant desire. She held the thing in her hands and trembled. She put it on the collar of her dress and wrapped it around her neck. She stared at her own reflection in the mirror for a long time.



Later, she asked hesitantly, full of worries: "Can you lend me this thing? I can only borrow this one?"



"Of course, of course."



She jumped up and hugged her friend's neck, kissed her passionately again and again, and finally, she took this treasure and slipped away.



The day of the party arrived, and Madame Loisel was a great success. She was more beautiful than the other female guests, fashionable, charming, smiling constantly, and crazy with joy. Most of the male guests looked at her in fascination, asking for her name and trying to get someone to lead them to her for introduction. Everyone in the confidential department of the ministry wanted to dance with her, and the minister also paid attention to her.



She danced with an intoxicated posture, danced with excited movements, she was intoxicated in joy, she was satisfied with the victory of her appearance, satisfied with the glory of her achievements; satisfied with all the flattery and praise and the triumphal song that made women think it was extremely complete and sweet, a kind of auspicious cloud of happiness surrounded her. So she didn't think about anything.



She left around four o'clock in the morning. Her husband had been asleep since midnight in a small, unnoticed living room with three other male guests; the wives of these three male guests were also dancing happily.



He put on her shoulders the clothes he had brought with him for the street, simple clothes for home use. The poverty of these things was incompatible with the luxury of the costumes for the ball. She felt this, and she wanted to run away to avoid the attention of other ladies wrapped in precious leather clothes.



Loisel held her hand: "Just wait. You will catch the cold when you go outside. I'll find a rental streetcar."



But she would not listen to him and hurried down the steps. When they reached the street, they couldn't find the car; so they began to look for it, chasing the cars they could see in the distance.



They walked down the bank of the Seine, feeling disappointed and shivering with cold. Finally, they found an old-fashioned car that looked like a nocturnal car on the river bank--such cars seemed to be ashamed of themselves in Paris during the day, so they were not seen until after dark.



The car took them outside the gate of their apartment on Martyr Street, and they went upstairs melancholy. To her, it was the end. As for him, he thought about Setup and he should be at the department at ten o'clock tomorrow morning. She took off the big cloak around her shoulders in front of the mirror, wanting to take a closer look at her glorious self. But suddenly she let out a wild scream. She no longer has the diamond necklace around her neck!



Her husband had already taken off half of his clothes and asked quickly: "How are you doing?"



She turned towards him as if in a daze: "I have... I have... I can't find Mrs. Forrest's necklace now."



He stood up at Setup in confusion: "What!...How!...How can such a thing happen!"



So they both searched in the folds of the dress, the folds of the cloak, and in the pockets. Can't find it anywhere.



He asked, "Are you sure you'll leave the dance with that thing hanging on you?"



"Yes, I even touched it in the aisles of the ministry."



"But if you lost it on the road, we could hear it fall. It would be in the car."



"Yes. It's possible. Have you written down the car number?"



"No. What about you, you didn't pay attention at first?"



"No."



They both looked at each other dumbfounded. Finally, Loisel put on his clothes again. "I'll go," he said, "I'll go over the route we walked and see if I can find it."



So he went out on the street. As for her, she didn't even have the strength to sleep. She never changed out of the clothes she wore for the party, so she just leaned on an armchair. There was no fire in the room and she was thinking of nothing.



Her husband comes home at seven o'clock. Nothing was found. He went to the police headquarters and the newspaper offices to offer a reward, to the cab companies, in short, to wherever there was a glimmer of hope.



She waited a whole day in a state of astonishment before this terrible disaster. Loisel returned in the evening with a thin, gray face; he found nothing. "Should," he said, "write a letter to your girlfriend saying that you broke the hook of the necklace and are now asking someone to repair it there. This way we can have a week at Turning Point." She wrote the letter under his dictation.



A week later, any hope was gone. And Loisel seemed to have aged five years and said loudly: "Now we should try to compensate for this treasure."



The next day, they took the box containing the treasure and followed the sign in the box to the jewelry store. The owner of the store checked many account books.



"Once upon a time, madam, this necklace was not sold in my store. I only made this box." So they visited jewelry stores one after another, looking for something similar to the lost piece of jewelry. They relied on their own memory for reference. They were almost sick because of sadness and sorrow.



They found a string of rosary beads set with diamonds in a small shop on Forbidden City Street, and they thought they were exactly what they were looking for. It was worth forty thousand gold francs. The store can give them thirty-six thousand.



So they begged the owner of the shop not to sell it within three days. And they also agreed on a condition: if the original string is found before the end of February, the store will use thirty-four thousand gold to buy it back.



Loisel had eighteen thousand gold francs left to him by his father. The remaining amount will have to be borrowed. He started to borrow money, borrowing a thousand gold francs from this one, five hundred from that one, five Luyi gold dollars from this place, and three more from another place. He signed many IOUs, entered into many bankrupt contracts, and dealt with those who exploited usury and lenders of various nationalities. He damaged his future for the rest of his life. He took the risk and signed his name regardless of success or failure. Moreover, he thought of the troubles in the future, the dark poverty that would weigh on him, and the prospect of all the material deprivation and all the mental torture. He felt horrified, and finally walked to the jewelry merchant's counter, put down the thirty-six thousand gold francs, and took out the new necklace.



When Madame Loisel returned the jewel to Madame Forestier, this lady said to her with an unhappy look: "You should have given it back to me sooner, for I might have wanted to use it."



She did not open the box, which was what worried her girlfriend. What would she think if she saw through this substitute? Wouldn't she think of her as a thief?



Mrs. Loisel had tasted the embarrassment of the poor. Moreover, he suddenly and heroically determined that this terrible debt must be paid. She's ready to pay it back. They fired the maid; they moved; they rented a loft under a roof somewhere.



She began to do all kinds of menial chores around the house, the boring daily tasks in the kitchen. She washed the dishes, scuffing her rose-colored fingers on the greasy floors of pots and pans. She washed the underwear and rags herself with soap and hung them on the rope; when she got up every morning, she carried the garbage downstairs and carried the water upstairs. After each floor, she had to sit on the stairs to take a breath. And she was dressed like a common woman. She walked to the vegetable store, grocery store and butcher's shop with her basket on her arm, bargaining for prices, getting scolded, and trying her best to protect her meager change one copper dollar at a time. Several IOUs are collected every month and several new ones are issued to extend the date. Her husband copied the accounts of a businessman in the evening, and often late at night, he had to copy books that cost five copper dollars a page.



In the end, this life was extended to ten years.



At the end of ten years, the two of them actually paid off all their debts, including the loan shark's interest and the amount added up by interest. Madame Loisel seemed to be getting old. Now, she has become a strong, strong and hard-working woman from a poor family. Her hair was tied up in a mess, her skirt was tied crookedly, her red hands were exposed, she spoke loudly, and washed the floor with a large basin of water. But sometimes her husband went to the office, and she sat alone in front of the window, and she thought about the party and the dance, where she was so beautiful and happy.



If she hadn't lost that piece of jewelry at that time, where would she be now? Who knows? Who knows? Life is so weird and unpredictable. Whether it's hurting you or saving you, it only takes a little bit. However, one Sunday, as she was walking around the Champs Elysées to relax from her daily work during the week, she suddenly saw a woman walking with her child. That was Mrs. Forestier, always young, always beautiful, always attractive.



Mrs. Loisel was very excited. Do you want to talk to her? Right, of course. And now that he has paid off his debt, he can tell her completely. Why not? She stepped forward.



"Good morning, Johnny."



That person didn't recognize her at all. She thought it was strange that she was being called so affectionately by this commoner woman. She hesitated and said:



"But... this lady!... I don't know... you must have made a mistake.



"Nothing wrong. My name is Mathilde Loisel. "



Her girlfriend yelled: "Oh! ...Poor Mathilde, you have really changed! …”



"Yes, I have lived through many very difficult days since I last saw you; and all the suffering is because of you! …”



"For me...what's going on? "



"In the past, you lent me a diamond necklace to attend a party at the ministry. Now, do you still remember? "



"Remember, how about it? "



"What, I lost that bunch of things. "



"If so, you would have returned it to me long ago. "



"What I gave you back was another identical string. It has taken us ten years now to pay the price. For people like us who have nothing, you understand that this is not easy... Now that I have paid off the debt, I am completely satisfied. "



Mrs. Forestier stopped and said, "Are you saying that you bought a diamond necklace to compensate for my necklace? "



"Yeah, you never noticed it before, did you? The two strings of things turned out to be exactly the same. After saying this, she smiled with a wave of conceited and innocent happiness.



Mrs. Forestier was very moved and took both of her hands:



"Alas. Poor Mathilde, but my string is fake, worth at most five hundred gold francs! …”